# Why nbdev


<!-- WARNING: THIS FILE WAS AUTOGENERATED! DO NOT EDIT! -->

Popular Python documentation standards such as [numpy
docstrings](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html#docstring-standard)
and
[sphinx](https://sphinx-rtd-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/docstrings.html)
facilitate documentation of source code with docstrings, which are
limited in their expressiveness and functionality. Notebooks, on the
other hand, offer a richer medium for authoring documentation (with
markdown and code cells) compared to docstrings, and unlock new ways of
documenting your code that are otherwhise infeasible.

Furthermore, traditional testing frameworks such as
[pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/) and
[unittest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) encourage
writing tests in a separate context that is disjointed from the
associated source code and documentation. With nbdev, you write tests in
the same context as your source code and documentation, such that tests
can optionally become part of the narrative within your documentation.

Since nbdev allows your colleagues and users to view the tests, code and
documentation in a single context with a REPL that invites
experimentation, the way you author code, documentation and tests in
nbdev are very different than traditional software development
workflows.

In [Notebook Best
Practices](../tutorials/best_practices.ipynb#putting-it-all-together-an-annotated-example)
we compare a function coded, tested, and documented in nbdev versus
ordinary .py files. Here are a few of the challenges we faced with other
approaches that led us to using nbdev. In .py files:

1.  Docstrings repeat information that is already contained in the
    function signature, such as names of parameters, default values, and
    types
2.  Examples are manually entered. This requires the author to copy and
    paste both the code and outputs. Furthermore, the author must
    manually re-enter or change these examples anytime the code changes,
    which is an error-prone process
3.  Examples are limited to short code snippets and cannot contain rich
    output like plots or graphics
4.  Examples cannot have prose interleaved with code except for code
    comments
5.  Readers of your code must copy and paste contents of the docstring
    if they wish to reproduce the examples.
